# Your first neural network

In this project, you'll build your first neural network and use it to predict daily bike rental ridership. We've provided some of the code, but left the implementation of the neural network up to you (for the most part). After you've submitted this project, feel free to explore the data and the model more.

## Load and prepare the data

A critical step in working with neural networks is preparing the data correctly. Variables on different scales make it difficult for the network to efficiently learn the correct weights. Below, we've written the code to load and prepare the data. You'll learn more about this soon!

## Checking out the data

This dataset has the number of riders for each hour of each day from January 1 2011 to December 31 2012. The number of riders is split between casual and registered, summed up in the cnt column. You can see the first few rows of the data above.

Below is a plot showing the number of bike riders over the first 10 days or so in the data set. (Some days don't have exactly 24 entries in the data set, so it's not exactly 10 days.) You can see the hourly rentals here. This data is pretty complicated! The weekends have lower over all ridership and there are spikes when people are biking to and from work during the week. Looking at the data above, we also have information about temperature, humidity, and windspeed, all of these likely affecting the number of riders. You'll be trying to capture all this with your model.

### Dummy variables

Here we have some categorical variables like season, weather, month. To include these in our model, we'll need to make binary dummy variables. This is simple to do with Pandas thanks to get_dummies().


     ==========================================
     Bike Sharing Dataset
     ==========================================

Hadi Fanaee-T

Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Decision Support (LIAAD), University of Porto
INESC Porto, Campus da FEUP
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 378
4200 - 465 Porto, Portugal

### Scaling target variables

To make training the network easier, we'll standardize each of the continuous variables. That is, we'll shift and scale the variables such that they have zero mean and a standard deviation of 1.

The scaling factors are saved so we can go backwards when we use the network for predictions.

### Splitting the data into training, testing, and validation sets

We'll save the data for the last approximately 21 days to use as a test set after we've trained the network. We'll use this set to make predictions and compare them with the actual number of riders.

We'll split the data into two sets, one for training and one for validating as the network is being trained. Since this is time series data, we'll train on historical data, then try to predict on future data (the validation set).


     =========================================
     Background 
     =========================================

Bike sharing systems are new generation of traditional bike rentals where whole process from membership, rental and return 
back has become automatic. Through these systems, user is able to easily rent a bike from a particular position and return 
back at another position. Currently, there are about over 500 bike-sharing programs around the world which is composed of 
over 500 thousands bicycles. Today, there exists great interest in these systems due to their important role in traffic, 
environmental and health issues. 

Apart from interesting real world applications of bike sharing systems, the characteristics of data being generated by
these systems make them attractive for the research. Opposed to other transport services such as bus or subway, the duration
of travel, departure and arrival position is explicitly recorded in these systems. This feature turns bike sharing system into
a virtual sensor network that can be used for sensing mobility in the city. Hence, it is expected that most of important
events in the city could be detected via monitoring these data.

     =========================================
     Data Set
     =========================================
Bike-sharing rental process is highly correlated to the environmental and seasonal settings. For instance, weather conditions,
precipitation, day of week, season, hour of the day, etc. can affect the rental behaviors. The core data set is related to  
the two-year historical log corresponding to years 2011 and 2012 from Capital Bikeshare system, Washington D.C., USA which is 
publicly available in http://capitalbikeshare.com/system-data. We aggregated the data on two hourly and daily basis and then 
extracted and added the corresponding weather and seasonal information. Weather information are extracted from http://www.freemeteo.com. 

     =========================================
     Associated tasks
     =========================================

	- Regression: 
		Predication of bike rental count hourly or daily based on the environmental and seasonal settings.
	
	- Event and Anomaly Detection:  
		Count of rented bikes are also correlated to some events in the town which easily are traceable via search engines.
		For instance, query like "2012-10-30 washington d.c." in Google returns related results to Hurricane Sandy. Some of the important events are 
		identified in [1]. Therefore the data can be used for validation of anomaly or event detection algorithms as well.


     =========================================
     Files
     =========================================

	- Readme.txt
	- hour.csv : bike sharing counts aggregated on hourly basis. Records: 17379 hours
	- day.csv - bike sharing counts aggregated on daily basis. Records: 731 days

	
     =========================================
     Dataset characteristics
     =========================================	
Both hour.csv and day.csv have the following fields, except hr which is not available in day.csv
	
	- instant: record index
	- dteday : date
	- season : season (1:springer, 2:summer, 3:fall, 4:winter)
	- yr : year (0: 2011, 1:2012)
	- mnth : month ( 1 to 12)
	- hr : hour (0 to 23)
	- holiday : weather day is holiday or not (extracted from http://dchr.dc.gov/page/holiday-schedule)
	- weekday : day of the week
	- workingday : if day is neither weekend nor holiday is 1, otherwise is 0.
	+ weathersit : 
		- 1: Clear, Few clouds, Partly cloudy, Partly cloudy
		- 2: Mist + Cloudy, Mist + Broken clouds, Mist + Few clouds, Mist
		- 3: Light Snow, Light Rain + Thunderstorm + Scattered clouds, Light Rain + Scattered clouds
		- 4: Heavy Rain + Ice Pallets + Thunderstorm + Mist, Snow + Fog
	- temp : Normalized temperature in Celsius. The values are divided to 41 (max)
	- atemp: Normalized feeling temperature in Celsius. The values are divided to 50 (max)
	- hum: Normalized humidity. The values are divided to 100 (max)
	- windspeed: Normalized wind speed. The values are divided to 67 (max)
	- casual: count of casual users
	- registered: count of registered users
	- cnt: count of total rental bikes including both casual and registered
	
     =========================================
     License
     =========================================
Use of this dataset in publications must be cited to the following publication:

[1] Fanaee-T, Hadi, and Gama, Joao, "Event labeling combining ensemble detectors and background knowledge", Progress in Artificial Intelligence (2013): pp. 1-15, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, doi:10.1007/s13748-013-0040-3.

@article{
	year={2013},
	issn={2192-6352},
	journal={Progress in Artificial Intelligence},
	doi={10.1007/s13748-013-0040-3},
	title={Event labeling combining ensemble detectors and background knowledge},
	url={http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13748-013-0040-3},
	publisher={Springer Berlin Heidelberg},
	keywords={Event labeling; Event detection; Ensemble learning; Background knowledge},
	author={Fanaee-T, Hadi and Gama, Joao},
	pages={1-15}
}

     =========================================
     Contact
     =========================================
	
For further information about this dataset please contact Hadi Fanaee-T (hadi.fanaee@fe.up.pt)
